#+title: Website Blocking as a Proxy of Policy Alignment
# #+subtitle: 
#+author: Nick Merrill
#+options: num:nil toc:nil
#+date: [2020-08-11 Tue]
#+HTML_HEAD: <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
#+HTML_HEAD: <script type="text/javascript" src="js/index.bundle.js"></script>

* Abstract

This work introduces a new proxy measure of policy alignment between states: website
blocking. This measure speaks to the information flow in the digital layer of
international politics, a new element to international trade and cooperation,
and one which existing metrics fail to capture. In addition, our 
measure can be constantly scraped and updated, offering a higher temporal
resolution than existing metrics. Our work suggests a link between Internet
governance and other issues in international relations. Since we can capture our
metric in real time, we can use changes in our metric to detect possible changes
in international relations faster than would otherwise be possible.

* Introduction

In international politics and political economy, the primitive unit of analysis
is frequently the /state/. One of the important observations is how and when
states “align” with each other. Do they support each other when it comes to
conflict with a third party? Do they trade more than one would expect (e.g.,
from gravity models)? Since formal trade agreements (e.g., European Union) and
formal alliances (e.g., NATO) only capture certain aspects of states’ alignment,
researchers have looked for other measures of policy alignment to fill in the
gaps.

#+CAPTION: Different metrics of policy alignment create connected graphs of countries. Our project adds a new topic area: the Internet.
#+LABEL: fig:proxies
[[./img/proxy-model.jpeg]]

Given two countries, policy alignment refers to the degree to which policies in
those two countries are similar along some set of dimensions. Since a country's
policy stance on any given set of issues is complex to the point of being
unobservable in a measurable way, /proxies/ of policy stances are used.

UN voting patterns provide an illustrative example. If two countries vote the
same way in the UN, researchers can use this behavior as a proxy to assess
policy alignment between those countries. UN votes do not carry much weight in
practice, but if we assume that countries cast votes on the basis of their
overall policy positions (i.e., rather than strategically, or symbolically) then
countries that vote similarly are more likely to have similar policies than
countries that vote differently cite:bailey2017estimating. Countries do not need to be actively
collaborating (e.g., in formal agreements) to show policy alignment (although
they might be). They may be voting the same way because of some underlying,
driving causal factor (e.g., a shared ideology, or shared geopolitical goals).

This notion of "alignment" is used as a predictive variable for other phenomena
of interest, including but not limited to formal treaties and alliances. Two
countries that have high policy alignment are more likely to support each other
in a conflict with a third party, for example, than two countries with low
policy alignment cite:pauls2017affinity.


** Webpage blocking as a metric of policy alignment

Currently, no metric of policy alignment measures Internet governance. Internet
governance refers to the policies that shape the Internet in any given country.
The Internet is a relatively new domain of International policy competition, as
well as a new domain in which trade, cooperation and conflict all take place. In
addition, we can collect data on our metric continuously, allowing us to detect
changes in policy alignment much more quickly than other metrics can afford.

One critical component of Internet governance is webpage blocking. Website
blocking, typically enacted directly by governments, makes a particular URL
unavailable in a particular country. In different countries, different sets of
websites are unavailable, either by redirecting the website request, or simply
dropping the request or its response. While the technical means for blocking
websites are diverse (discussed below), the end result is that a user cannot
access a webpage.

In this project, we use similarities in webpage blocking patterns to build a
metric of policy alignment on Internet governance. If two countries block the
similar content (more on what "similar" means later), we consider this alignment
a proxy of policy alignment on Internet governance issues. They may not have
conferred, but their blocking decision reveals a shared outlook or set of
geopolitical goals.

* Methods

From a technical standpoint, there are a variety of methods for blocking webpages. One
option is to manipulate domain name system (DNS) messages in order to make
websites appear unresolveable. Another option is to drop TCP handshake packages
with particular destination IPs, effectively making IP addresses impossible to
contact. A related option is to allow the TCP handshake to occur, but inject
follow-up TCP packets that either break or supersede the legitimate response.
Yet another option is to make a legal case to a particular service provider (for
example, asking Facebook to block a page in a particular country).

[[http://iclab.org/][ICLab]], a longitudinal corpus of website blocking events, seeks to deal with this
diversity in blocking strategies. It focuses on consistency in blocking
measurements across countries and over time. As of this writing, the ICLab has
collected twelve datasets ranging from January, 2017 to September, 2018. In this
paper, we use the ICLab dataset to produce a metric of policy alignment with
respect to Internet governance. We report on three attempts to use this dataset
to do so. (Note that, before each of these experiments, we cleaned and
pre-processed the data. See Appendix for details.).

** Attempt 1: Strict overlap

The simplest metric for policy overlap would be to measure exact overlaps in
blocked websites between countries. When two countries block the same url (e.g.,
=example.abc/site/=), we take that as a signal of policy alignment in our model.
To compute our metric, we first found the web pages that appear to be blocked in
each country, grouping by the ICLab data’s country column. This is
straightforward in principle, but in practice, yields minimal variation in the
data. Even countries with relatively high blocking in our dataset have no more
than five URLs in common. For most pairs of countries in our dataset, this method
yields no overlaps at all.

** Attempt 2: Fuzzy overlap

To get around the lack of strict overlaps in website blocking, we next attempted
to measure "fuzzy" overlaps in blocking between countries by considering only
root domains. Consider the webpage =facebook.com/some-page= and the webpage
=facebook.com/different-page=. If Country A blocks the first and Country B
blocks the second, is that overlap? By our prior method, this would not count as
overlap. However, by this method, it would: they're both blocking the same root
domain (=facebook.com=). To achieve this, we performed the same steps as in
Experiment 1, but used Python’s [[https://pypi.org/project/tldextract/][tldextract]] library to separate domains and
suffixes from site urls. We removed any duplicate domain-suffix pairs. However,
we still observe very little overlap with this approach. For example, Turkey and
Russia have 121 and 340 blocking events in our dataset, respectively, but only
23 websites in common.

** Attempt 3: Overlap in content of blocked webpages
Not only do the Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 methods produce minimal variation
in the data, they also lose some important sources of variation: the themes of
the content these two countries are interested in blocking. In some sense, this
seems intuitively closer to the true source of variation we are seeking to
measure. Two states may block different websites that are, in practical terms,
“the same” in that both represent content that state is trying to exclude.

Here's an illustrative example: India blocks Facebook pages that advocate for
Muslim rights, especially regarding issues around Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar
cite:fb. While no other countries block Facebook pages to such
a degree as India, other countries do block websites at the intersection of
religion and political movements (Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Russia and more).

Thus, we set out to measure thematic overlaps in blocked content between
countries. Consider =domain1.com= and =domain2.com=. If they're both categorized
as "religious," and two countries block them, we would consider this an overlap.
While these categorizations necessarily lack granularity, it is common for
widely-used metrics such as “press freedom” cite:PressFreedomRanking to
categorize content at an analogous level (see Limitations for a further
discussion on classification). In their own analysis of their toolkit, ICLab
settled on a similar technique, and used FortiGuard's URL categories to classify
websites' content cite:niaki2020iclab.

FortiGuard provides a “web filter” for corporations, allowing networks to block
(for example) pornography or gambling sites. To make this service work,
FortiGuard maintains a URL classification service, which returns a category for
any given URL. FortiGuard maintains 87 different classifications
cite:fortiguard_2020. Their ontology is tailored toward the instrumental
purpose of maintaining corporate web policies; we return to the implications of
this ontology, as well as alternative ontologies, in our discussion and
limitations sections.

For each country, we take the FortiGuard classification of each URL. We are left
with a set of classifications, which we can represent proportionally: we can
represent the percentage each category contributes to the total set of a
country’s blocked sites. One advantage of this method is that it is invariant to
the number of blocked sites total, allowing comparisons between countries that
block different numbers of sites. 

As an example, see a Figure [[fig:4country]], in which we see the relative blocking
activity of four countries that are all very differently situated in the
international order. This selection of countries indicates that there is
meaningful variation between countries in our dataset. Motivated by this
variation, we devised a similarity metric by which we can compare any two
countries.
 
 
#+CAPTION: Proportion of websites blocked in Turkey, Russia, India and South Korea across a subset of Fortiguard categories. (Our dataset contained 78 categories for each country; we display only a few here for demonstration). We observe that these different countries block websites of various categories in different proportions. There appears to be meaningful variation in the data across countries.
#+NAME: fig:4country
[[./img/4country.png]]


To compute this similarity metric, we interpret the percentage of websites
blocked in each category as a set of coordinates in n-dimensional space (e.g.,
{10, 20, 30, 40} if there were four categories). We can then compute the
distance between any two coordinates using the spatial cosine distance. We are
left with a distance between 0 and 1, which we can subtract from 1 to represent
closeness (rather than distance) and then interpret as a percentage. By this
metric, the similarity between India and South Korea is 20.4%. Between Turkey
and Russia---countries which had only two domains in common in Experiment
2---the similarity is 76.46%.

* Our measure

#+BEGIN_EXPORT html
<div id="fig1"></div>
<script>
  index.InteroperabilityVisualization({
    visId: 'fig1',
    numIncrements: 5,
    minSimilarity: 0,
    maxSimilarity: 1,
    digitsRounded: 2,
    colorScheme: "schemeBlues",
    defaultMode: "force",
    enabledModes: ["force"],
    tableProperties: ["similarity"],
    showTable: false,
    forceProperties: {
      visHeight: "800px",
      linkMultiplier: 3,
    }
  });
</script>
#+END_EXPORT
#+CAPTION: Force-directed graph of similarities in our dataset. 
#+LABEL: fig:force-directed
[[./img/dummy.png]]


First, our metric reveals a large cluster of countries that are mostly similar to
one another. Most of the countries in our dataset, in fact, lie close together,
forming one tight component of countries with mostly similar content blocking
policies.

Second, our metric reveals the connectivity patterns of those countries that are
/not/ members of this connected cluster. Venezuela stands alone, blocking a
unique mixture of reference content (13.9%), games (10.4%) and educational pages
(11.9%). Saudi Arabia, South Korea, Turkey and Russia form another, looser
cluster.

South Korea's presence in this cluster surprised us. However, sites categorized
/News and Media/ account for a similar proportion of blocked content in Saudi
Arabia as they do in South Korea (10.1% and 12.4%, respectively), as do
/Advocacy Organizations/ (0.99% and 1.63%) and /Newsgroups and Messageboard/
(1.2% and 2.6%).

In general, our metric captures significant differences between countries
typically considered to have “closed” Internets. For example, China and India
stand apart from both this loose, four-country cluster. China, which is
popularly imagined to "export" its model of the Internet to its Belt & Road allies
cite:chinaexport, in fact has low similarity with such countries. It is
relatively unique, 90% similar to Hong Kong. Otherwise, it shares notable
similarities only with Lichtenstein, for which /News and Media/ sites comprise
19.8% of blocked content (compared to 57.4% in China).


#+BEGIN_EXPORT html
<div id="fig2"></div>

<script>
  index.InteroperabilityVisualization({
    visId: 'fig2',
    numIncrements: 5,
    minSimilarity: 0,
    maxSimilarity: 1,
    digitsRounded: 2,
    colorScheme: "schemeBlues",
    defaultMode: "force",
    enabledModes: ["force"],
    showTable: false,
    forceProperties: {
      visHeight: "750px",
      selectedCountry: "CHN",
      linkMultiplier: 3,
    }
  });
</script>
#+END_EXPORT
#+CAPTION: China's blocking patterns are relatively unique, sharing notable similarities only with Hong Kong and, to a lesser degree, with Lichtenstein.
#+LABEL: fig:force-directed-china
[[./img/dummy.png]]

Finally, our findings reveal that the majority of countries in our dataset are
mostly similar; one large cluster dominates Internet policy by our metric's
measure. A few websites demonstrate a moderate volume of blocking while
retaining a degree of interoperability with this main block. Vietnam, Serbia,
Singapore, Belize, Taiwan, Bulgaria, Ukraine and Hong Kong all surround the the
perimeter of this main, interoperable Internet (Figure [[fig:force-directed]]),
retaining moderately high similarities with countries in the cneter. These
"perimeter" countries indicate important variations in our dataset, perhaps
signalling a dual risk and opportunity of deviating from the global Internet on
one hand, and enforcing national sovereignty on the other.

The value of our findings is, as suggested earlier, dual. First, this work
provides a new and more dynamic metric of alignment that supplements existing
metrics. In this section, we examined our metric in this context. Second, our
metric may complement other measures of international relations (e.g., of trade
or of civil rights policy). The following section turns to this possibility. We
compare our metric to existing metrics of alignment and ask to what degree our
measurement is distinctive, and to what degree it overlaps with traditional
domains of measurement in international relations.

* Comparisons to other domains

How does Internet governance, as measured by our metric, relate to other domains
in international relations? In this section, we evaluate the correlation of our
metric to existing features of the international relations: trade alliances;
military alliances; measures of personal and press freedom; and cultural and
historical ties. We find that our metric is associated with many of these
features. These correlations suggest that Internet governance is not /sui
generis/: patterns of alignment in the digital domain are roughly similar to
those in other, more familiar domains.

** Trade alliances: European Union (EU)
<<eu>>

The Internet is often described as both a cause and an effect of trade. As a
cause, the Internet enables trade; countries have an incentive to converge on
Internet governance policies, as doing so will lower trade barriers. As an
effect, high levels of trade between two countries create interdependence
between economies. This interdependence would become more expensive to sustain
if Internet policies between these two countries were highly discrepant; thus,
Internet governance policies converge. While real causal relationships are
likely mixed, both causal pathways give us reason to suspect that trade
relationships might be correlated with shared Internet blocking policies.

# *** EU vs non-EU
As a case study, we looked to the European Union. We collected the similarity
metrics between all pairs of EU countries (within-EU group), and between all
pairs of EU- and non-EU countries (outside-EU group). We performed a Mann
Whitney U-Test on the within-EU and outside-EU groups, which found that EU
countries are more similar with one another (M=0.97) than they are with non-EU
countries (M=0.89) group (U=99666, p<0.001).

# *** EU: NATO vs Warsaw Pact
We re-ran this test with EU countries that were and were not members of the
Soviet bloc before the fall of the Soviet Union. “Western bloc” EU countries
were more similar to one another (M=0.98) than to non-Western bloc countries,
whether or not those countries are in the EU (0.93), (U=32701, p<0.001).
However, we do not find evidence that former “Soviet bloc” countries in the EU
were more similar to one another (M=0.97) than to non-Soviet bloc countries
(again, regardless of whether those countries were in the EU) (M=0.93) (U=4327,
p = 0.41).

*** Takeaways

We find that EU countries are overall more similar to one another than they are
to the rest of the world. There are a few possible explanations for this
observation. One explanation is that joining the EU causes "digital behavior"
(as measured by website blocking) to converge. Another explanation is that
countries are more likely to join an alliance when they are more culturally,
legally and politically similar in the first place (see our analysis of cultural
and historical ties, below, for further reflections on this point).

Surprisingly, however, former Soviet countries within the EU are not
significantly more self-similar to one another than they are to the world at
large. European Union countries that were NATO allies, however, /were/ more
similar to one another than to the world at large. What do we make of this
discrepancy?

One explanation is that, while joining an alliance causes countries to converge
on various policies, institutional structures internal to countries set limits
on this convergence. On the Eastern side, our finding would seem to suggest that
the "legacy of communism" arguments from the 1990s, which argued that
newly-liberated former Warsaw Pact countries would carry institutional and
cultural legacies from that past into their future political and economic
alignments and practices in a a kind of political hysteresis
cite:nodia2000chasing,rose1998prospects is not visible in the digital layer.

  
Future work could also explore aspects of global trade outside of formal
agreements. Non-tariff barriers to trade cite:evenett2019protectionism present
one potential avenue. We would expect to find an inverse correlation between
non-tariff barriers and our metric: two countries more open to trade should have
similar blocking profiles.
#   maybe talk about trade w digital goods as well (think tiktok...)

** Military alliances
Increasing concern about “cyberwar” makes it plain that many see the Internet as
a key tool in military conflict. However, military alliances signal policy
overlap even if no one fires a bullet. Military alliances signal that one
country would be willing to fight for another; alliance signals a willingness to
sacrifice a great deal for another actor, which in turn suggests policy
alignment cite:de1983war.

# *** North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Is shared digital policy around website blocking related to shared military
objectives? To evaluate this question, we started with the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), an intergovernmental military alliance between 30 North
American and European countries. If digital-layer blocking policy is related to
military objectives, we would expect NATO countries to be overall more similar
by our measure to other NATO members than to non-NATO members.

We collected the similarity metrics between all pairs of NATO countries
(within-NATO group), and between all pairs of NATO- and non-NATO countries
(outside-NATO group). We performed a Mann Whitney U-Test on the two groups, and
found the within-NATO (M=0.97) group had significantly higher similarity scores
than the outside-NATO (M=0.90) group (U=93709, p<0.001).

# *** Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
We performed the same test with ASEAN countries (Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia,
Singapore, Philippines, Vietnam, Brunei, Cambodia, Myanmar, Laos). Although
ASEAN countries have a higher overall similarity with one another (M=0.82) than
with non-ASEAN countries (M=0.76), our Mann Whitney U-Test falls short of
significance (U=814, p=0.084).


*** Takeaways

NATO countries are significantly more similar to one another in Internet
blocking patterns than they are to non-NATO countries. It is interesting to note
that we did /not/ find this to be true for former Warsaw pact countries in our
prior analysis (see our section on trade alliances, above). Together, these
results imply that the "digital consequences" of NATO membership may be greater
than the legacy effects of the Warsaw pact

Of course, this result does not necessarily indicate that NATO countries have
similar Internet blocking policies /because/ doing so serves their shared
military objectives. Within-NATO scores could be higher due to other legal,
historical and trade relationships between NATO countries. However, our result
does provide some evidence that Internet policy is not entirely detached from
military objectives.

At the same time, and in contrast to NATO countries, ASEAN countries are not
significantly self-similar. This finding reinforces the view that ASEAN is a
less coherent, less institutionally robust alliance than is NATO
cite:acharya2014constructing.


** Personal and press freedom

Reporters Without Borders’ World Press Freedom Index cite:PressFreedomRanking quantifies the degree of
freedom available to journalists in 180 countries. We find a moderate positive
correlation between blocking similarity and media freedom rank, r(1483) = 0.38,
p<0.001. Countries more similar to one another in press freedom ranking are also
more similar to one another in Internet blocking patterns.

Freedom House’s Freedom in the World Index cite:freedomhouse2020 quantifies the
freedom of electoral processes, political participation, functioning of
government, freedom of expression and association, rule of law, and personal
autonomy around the world. We find a moderate positive correlation between
similarity in World Press Freedom ranking and Internet blocking similarity,
r(1483) = 0.45, p<0.001. The Freedom in the World index and the World Press
Freedom indices are themselves highly positively correlated with one another,
r(156) = 0.85, p<0.001.

*** Takeaways

The presence of a positive correlation between blocking similarities implies
that changes to our Internet blocking metric could predict changes to press
freedom and personal freedom in countries. If a country becomes more similar in
its Internet blocking patterns to Sweden, its personal and press freedom
rankings are liable to increase; as it becomes more similar to Russia, we can
infer that its personal and press freedom rankings are decreasing. This
prediction is purely correlative; our data do not present a causal claim in one
direction or the other. That said, our metric promises a faster and
cheaper-to-collect method than existing metrics used in the indices we mention.

At the same time, the fact that our metric does not relate /more/ strongly to
measures of personal and press freedom is itself telling. In other words,
Internet blocking policy cannot be explained entirely by personal and press
freedom alone. Future work should examine where specifically correlations
between Internet blocking and press or personal freedom break down. What about
Internet blocking cannot be explained by press freedom? Those studies could lead
to both a more fine-grained metric of personal and press freedom, and
potentially to a more fine-grained metric of website blocking.

** Cultural and historical ties: Commonwealth countries
<<commonwealth>>

The correlations we have discussed so far have been suggestive of ties between
Internet governance policy and other domains, such as press freedom, trade and
military alliance. However, in all cases, our findings are confounded somewhat
by shared cultural history. Along with their trade alliance, countries in the EU
share many legal, cultural and historical similarities. The same is true of NATO
members and, to a degree, of countries with high press freedom.

To what degree can Internet governance policies be explained by cultural
relationships---shared legal precedent and cultural norms? To examine this
question, we analyzed Commonwealth countries, an association of 54 member
states, nearly all former territories of the British Empire. This association
represents a shared history of British colonialism, and correlates with various
cultural factors including use of English language, representative governments
and common law systems. Of course, these member countries are also quite diverse
in GDP per capita and human development. However, if Internet blocking relates
to historical norms around speech, we would expect Commonwealth countries to
have more similar blocking patterns to one another than to non-Commonwealth
countries.

We collected the similarity metrics between all pairs of Commonwealth countries
(within-Commonwealth group), and between all pairs of Commonwealth- and
non-Commonwealth countries (outside-Commonwealth group). We performed a Mann
Whitney U-Test on the two groups, and failed to reject that null hypothesis the
within-Commonwealth (M=0.89) group shared higher similarity scores than the
outside-Commonwealth (M=0.89) group (U=9922, p=0.59).

*** Takeaways

Our finding implies that Commonwealth heritage is not reflected in website
blocking. This throws into question the degree to which our previous
findings---significant similarities between EU countries, NATO countries, or
countries with high press or personal freedom---are explainable by cultural and
historical relationships alone.

However, historical relationships are not the only proxy of shared cultural
connection. Present-day cultural connections may be better measured through, for
example, plane flights. We might expect countries with high Internet blocking
similarities to have more airline flights between them. Future work could
explore these and other relationships to determine how cultural, political and
legal similarities may explain variance in Internet blocking patterns.

* Conclusion

This work presents Internet blocking as a metric of policy alignment. It
represents policy in a domain not well-studied by other metrics of alignment:
the realm of Internet governance.

Correlations between our metric and metrics from other domains strong remind us
that digital layer does not float freely from political realities, nor does it
undermine traditional patterns in international relations. Instead, it either
reflects or reinforces these patterns; or, most likely, a bit of both. These
correlations indicate opportunities for future work on trade, military
agreements, and beyond to use our metric to deepen insights in their domains,
and vice versa.

At the same time, our work demonstrates the value and relevance of Internet
fragmentation to policymakers. Internet fragmentation is not simply a technical
issue. Internet fragmentation, at least as measured by content blocking, appears
to be entangled with many aspects of the global order.

As such, future work could attempt to assess the usefulness of this metric as a
“leading indicator” of changes to international relations. Unlike other metrics
of global trade, military alliance, or civil rights, we can measure Internet
blocking continuously. As one country converges with others on content blocking
patterns, we would expect those countries to be more likely to, for example,
join a trade pact in the future. To name an example timely as of the time of
this writing, imagine that the United States blocks the Chinese apps WeChat and
TikTok, and the European Union does not follow suit. With that change, we could
predict that the EU would be more likely to trade with China than would the US.

Similarly, our tool could be used to generate "what-if" scenarios. If
policymakers are toying with blocking a particular website (consider the
US's musings around blocking TikTok as of the time of this writing), our metric
could indicate how this blocking event would change the structure of similarity
relations globally.

In the future, we aim to develop our tool to be more comprehensive, covering
multiple layers of the TCP/IP stack (Table [[tab:layers]]). This metric, which
covers content blocking alone, focuses on the "application" layer of DNS and
HTTP. Our future work could explore fragmentation "lower down" the stack (e.g.,
at the protocol layer, where a transition from IPv4 to IPv6 plays out unevenly
around the globe). Future work could also explore fragmentation "higher up" the
stack, looking at laws that limit data flow or enforce Internet sovereignty
cite:bejtlich2015strategic.

#+caption: A "layer" model of the Internet, with possible metrics for each layer. The work we present here only covers Layer 4.
#+label: tab:layers
| *Layer*            | *Number*  | *Our metric*           |
|--------------------+-----------+-----------------------------|
| Legal/social/human | Layer 5   | Data locality laws          |
| /Application/      | /Layer 4/ | /Website blocking/          |
| Transport          | Layer 3   | Network interference events |
| Network            | Layer 2   | IPv4 to IPv6 transition     |
| Link               | Layer 1   | Physical infrastructure     |



We also aim to collect data more frequently, updating our metric as continuously
as possible (and archiving prior metrics). The Open Observatory of Network
Interference (OONI) cite:ooni collects Internet measurements continuously, including data
about website blocking. These terabytes of data, collected second-to-second,
could be used to detect sudden changes in blocking patterns. These changes could
themselves act as harbingers of changes to the international order.

* Appendix

#+BEGIN_EXPORT html
<div id="fig3"></div>
<script>
  index.InteroperabilityVisualization({
    visId: 'fig3',
    numIncrements: 5,
    minSimilarity: 0,
    maxSimilarity: 1,
    digitsRounded: 2,
    colorScheme: "schemeBlues",
    defaultMode: "geomap",
    enabledModes: ["geomap"],
    showTable: false,
    geomapProperties: {
      visHeight: "800px",
      defaultFill: '#d3d3d3',
      selectedFill: '#228B22',
      highlightedFill: 'orange',
      highlightBorderWidth: 2,
      selectedCountry: "CAN",
    },
  });
</script>
#+END_EXPORT
#+CAPTION: A map of similarities between countries' website blocking patterns. Click on countries to view their similarities with other countries.
#+LABEL: fig:force-directed
[[./img/dummy.png]]

# TODO distribution of similarity metrics? show the nice variation?
#+CAPTION: Distribution of similarity metrics in our dataset. Most pairs of countries have a high similarity, with a long tail of pairs that have a low similarity.
#+LABEL: fig:proxy-dist
** Data, code and visualization
Our metric, and the code used to generate it, are [[https://github.com/daylight-lab/website-blocking-proxy][available via GitHub]]. The code that powers our interactive visualizations are also [[https://github.com/lilybhattacharjee5/interoperability-demo][accessible via GitHub]].
** Data cleaning
We had 12 datasets (.csv files) ranging from January 2017 to September 2018 which
amounted to a total of 50,436,865 observations. Each observation represents a
single GET request to a particular URL in a particular country at a particular
time. These observations represent both blocked and not-blocked websites; they
represent queries meant to discover if a website is blocked or not. Results are
reported regardless of the test outcome. Since this data is from longitudinal
study, our data set may contain multiple GET requests to the same website across
different countries at different points of time.

We consider a website blocked when a website has any of ICLab’s blocking-related
features set to True (=dns_all=, =censored_updated=, =block=, =packet_updated=). This
permissive approach allows us to detect all types of blockings available to
ICLab. We count each such dataset as blocked. Over all observations in the
datastet, 232,348 are blocked, or 0.46% of the dataset.

Finally, we augment this dataset by adding the Fortiguard category for each
website observed to be blocked in the dataset. After this process, we are left
with 78 categories of website blocking across 55 countries.

** Limitations
*** ICLab data
While ICLab does a good job at detecting when a website is blocked, there are a
few limitations that hinder our ability to reliably decide if a given webpage is
blocked or not.

1. Particular websites may discriminate against VPN users. For example, Netflix
   blocks all known VPNs. This may make a website appear to be blocked when it
   really isn't. For now, we correct for this by tossing out all websites that
   appear to be blocked in the US, as we know the US does not block any websites, at least in the traditional sense. [fn:2]
2. Some VPN providers manipulate traffic themselves (sometimes injecting ads).
3. Lists of URLs to test are biased. What websites do you test for blocking?
   ICLab cobbles together numerous datasets from across the web, but some
   (especially the Citizen Lab lists) suffer from selection bias, as they're
   manually curated by activists with a particular political bent.
4. Vantage points can be difficult to set up in countries where blocking is
   rampant, and in countries with adversarial regimes. These points are
   typically set up by volunteers. For example, Iran and Syria have no
   volunteers for now, as the ICLab maintainers decided the political situation
   is too risky there. ICLab lost access to VPNs in Iran in May 2017 due to
   sanctions, resulting in missing data in that country. Missing data in that
   country makes there appear to be little blocking, when in fact website blocking
   may be much higher than we are measuring.
5. Countries could evade blocking detection. If a country can conceal its
   website blocking actions, how would we know they're doing it? This is a major
   source of epistemic risk: countries may be using secret or unknown mechanisms
   to achieve blocking in certain countries, or may be strategically avoiding
   blocking content to vantage points such as VPNs.
6. TCP handshakes create some uncertainty as we’re not sure whether the
   observations constitute actual interference. More data from more vantage
   points could resolve some of this ambiguity.

# With future funding, we could very easily contribute to ICLab to help overcome a
# few of these issues—it could be interesting to think about a piece of this to
# break off and make our own.

A more fundamental issue with ICLab data is that the blocking events in this
dataset do not necessarily relate to government action. Individual websites,
such as Netflix, can choose to block traffic originating from particular
countries. We decided to include these cases of probable non-government
blocking, as they still show a degree of Internet fragmentation---the degree to
which the Internet is different across different countries.

*** Content categorization

FortiGuard doesn't capture the fine-grained thematic content of a website.
FortiGuard [[https://fortiguard.com/webfilter?q=https://www.facebook.com/BlackLivesMatter/&version=8][classifies the Facebook BlackLivesMatter group as "social
networking,"]] indicating that FortiGuard does not capture the subject matter of
particular Facebook pages. FortiGuard’s 87 categories are based on the user
needs of their “three major groups of customers: enterprises, schools and
homes/families” cite:fortiguard_2020. It is unclear that these categories are a perfect fit for
our usecase of measuring or detecting policies behind website blocking
decisions.

However, a pervasive epistemological issue is that we don’t know what the right
categories should be. The “ground truth” category for Black Lives Matter’s
Facebook page, for example, is unclear. Is it “race”? “Politics”? These
boundaries are even less clear for religious movements in Myanmar. Some
categories straddle the religious and political, while FortiGuard’s given
categories (e.g., “extremism,” “drug abuse”) embed their own politics. Future
work could make alternative or complementary categories for webpages based on
NLP, allowing us to uncover or induce multiple overlapping topics from webpages
in our corpus rather than relying on the overly-simplistic, one-of-n
classification of webpages.

Also, we can't be sure that governments (versus private companies) are really
performing the website blocking we're detecting. It could very well be the case
that renegade ISPs blocks content, or that individual sites refuse to serve
particular countries (perhaps to cut down on fraud or avoid sanctions). While
it's overwhelming likely that blocking is occurring with state support, the
difficulty in knowing for sure adds some uncertainty to our use of these data as
a proxy for policy.

*** False negatives

One epistemic issue in our dataset is possible false negatives. As an example of
when this issue might crop up, consider China and India. China and india both
have roughly the same number of observations (2597 vs 2921), but India has a
much higher number of websites blocked (519 vs 47). There are a few possible
explanations for this observation. One is that India blocks more frequently than
China. However, other possible explanations point to issues of false negatives.
Websites blocked in China may not appear on the lists used by ICLab.
Alternatively, this difference in the number of blocked websites may be an
artifact of the nature of blocking in China, which could focus more on content
within apps then with specific URLs.


* Footnotes

[fn:2] While the United States does not block websites by interfering with
network traffic, the United States does use its legal system to seize websites
that violate US law. One prolific effort is Operation In Our Sites, managed by
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). cite:kopel2013operation While this
activity does constitute Internet censorship, it does not cause Internet
fragmentation /per se/, as seized websites become equally unavailable worldwide.
Future work should monitor US website seizing operations more closely.

#+BIBLIOGRAPHY: refs plain limit:t option:-nokeywords
